# Explainable Summarization

This is a GitHub Pages project showcasing explainable text summarization. The tool is introduced in the paper “Let’s Agree to Disagree”: Investigating the
Disagreement Problem in Explainable AI for Text Summarization.

View the live site here and understand the summarization model: [Explainable Summarization](https://svc04.github.io/Explainable-Summarization/)

## Key Features
- Provides interactive visualizations for summarization explanations.
- Uses JavaScript for dynamic user interactions.
- Fully responsive and hosted via GitHub Pages.

### Requirements
- The input format should contain:
  - **Source sentences**: Enclosed in **quotation marks (`" "`)** and separated by **commas**.
  - **Attribution scores**: A comma-separated list of **normalized values** (e.g., between 0 and 1).
  - The attribution weights can be fetched using the **Inseq library** by **Sarti et al., 2023** [🔗](https://github.com/inseq-team/inseq).

## Tool’s Interface:
- Title to mention which XAI method is used to generate attribution weight
- Model Generated Summary (Paste it as is generated by the model without any additional quotation or commas)
- Accepts **source sentences** in quotation marks (`" "`) separated by commas.
- Accepts **corresponding normalized attribution scores** as comma-separated values.
- Allows users to **explore the influence of each sentence on the summary generation**.

### Example Input and Weights
- Title: Attribution analysis of summarization model using XAI method: LIME 

- Summary: XAI for text summarization helps understand the model's decision-making process. We can understand the influence of input features on the summary.

- Sentence 1: "Explainable AI(XAI) helps understand the model's decision-making." 
  attribution_weight_s1 = 0.7
- Sentence 2: "XAI in text summarization helps in understanding the contribution of input features, such as input tokens or sentences, to the model-generated summary."
  attribution_weight_s2 = 0.5
- Sentence 3: "Leveraging XAI for text summarization, we can get an idea about the most important sentences while the summary is generated."
  attribution_weight_s3 = 0.3

Note: To extract attribution weights, you can use the **Inseq library**:

To visualize the plot of three sentences with its weight should be added as:

- Title: Attribution analysis of summarization model using XAI method: LIME 

- Summary: XAI for text summarization helps understand the model's decision-making process. We can understand the influence of input features on the summary.

- Input Sentences: "Explainable AI(XAI) helps understand the model's decision-making.", "XAI in text summarization helps in understanding the contribution of input features, such as input tokens or sentences, to the model-generated summary.","Leveraging XAI for text summarization, we can get an idea about the most important sentences while the summary is generated."

- Weights: 0.7, 0.5, 0.3

After Adding these Inputs, users can click on the generate text plot button, creating a color-coded plot with the scores further normalized between the range of [0,1].
